\# Forest Fire Prediction Model

\## Overview

This repository contains a machine learning model for predicting forest
fire confidence levels based on various environmental factors. The model
is built using the CatBoostRegressor algorithm and optimized using
RandomizedSearchCV and GridSearchCV for hyperparameter tuning.

\## Dataset

The model is trained on a dataset containing observations of forest fire
incidents, including features such as latitude, longitude, brightness,
and fire radiative power (FRP). The dataset is split into a training set
and a test set for model development and evaluation.

\## Features

\- \*\*Categorical Features\*\*: Day/night classification and satellite
type. - \*\*Numerical Features\*\*: Latitude, longitude, brightness,
brightness temperature (bright_t31), FRP, and timestamps (acquisition
date and time).

\## Model Building Process

1\. \*\*Data Loading and Exploration\*\*: The dataset is loaded into
pandas DataFrames, and basic exploratory data analysis (EDA) is
performed to understand the distribution of features and target
variable.

2\. \*\*Feature Engineering\*\*: Additional features such as month, day,
hour, and minute are extracted from the timestamps. Interaction terms
between related features (e.g., brightness and bright_t31) are created
to capture complex relationships.

3\. \*\*Data Preprocessing\*\*: Categorical features are one-hot
encoded, and numerical features are standardized using sklearn\'s
ColumnTransformer.

4\. \*\*Model Selection and Hyperparameter Optimization\*\*: The
CatBoostRegressor model is chosen for its ability to handle categorical
features and robust performance. Hyperparameters are optimized using
RandomizedSearchCV and GridSearchCV to improve model performance.

5\. \*\*Model Training and Evaluation\*\*: The final model is trained on
the training data and evaluated using mean squared error (MSE) and
R-squared (R\^2) on both the training and test sets to assess
performance and check for overfitting.

6\. \*\*Feature Importance\*\*: The importance of each feature is
visualized to understand which features have the most significant impact
on predicting forest fire confidence levels.

7\. \*\*Predictions and Submission\*\*: The trained model is used to
make predictions on the test set, and the results are saved to a CSV
file for submission to the contest.

\## Usage

To use the model:

1\. Install the required libraries listed in \`requirements.txt\`. 2.
Load the training and test datasets. 3. Follow the steps outlined in the
Jupyter notebook or Python script to preprocess the data, train the
model, and make predictions.

\## Results

The model achieves an R\^2 score of 0.85 on the test set, indicating
good predictive performance. However, further analysis is needed to
ensure the model\'s robustness and generalizability.

\## Future Improvements

\- Investigate additional feature engineering techniques to capture more
complex relationships. - Experiment with other machine learning
algorithms and ensemble methods for comparison. - Explore advanced model
evaluation techniques such as cross-validation and learning curves.
